#labels Draft
#summary Write summary here.


==  Pronouns ==

Pronouns are characterized by their ability to appear as subjects and direct objects on their own, without any complements.

  * '''subject test:''' if a word can appear as a subject on its own, and it is not a common noun, proper name, or type-shifted adjective, then it is a pronoun.
  * '''partitive test:''' pronouns allow a partitive "af" prepositional complement.
  * ''''''

Pronouns are subdivided into definite/indefinite, mass/singular/plural, common/neuter:

  * '''adjectival definiteness test:''' a singular pronoun is definite if an associated adjectival modifier is e-marked -- eg, "en gammel" (indefinite) vs. "den gamle" (definite).
  *

The table below lists our analysis of different classes of Danish pronouns with respect to type, complements and adjunct governors. We distinguish between common nouns, pronouns, and adjectives, with three kinds of number (mass, singular and plural), and two kinds of definiteness (definite and indefinite), using the following notation:

  * '''word class:''' '''N''' = common noun, '''P''' = pronoun, '''A''' = adjective
  * '''number:''' '''m''' = mass, '''s''' = singular, '''p''' = plural, '''c''' = countable = singular or plural
  * '''definiteness:''' '''d''' = definite, '''i''' = indefinite

The paradigms of "mange af X" allows definite plural nouns and pronouns, but not indefinite plurals; the paradigm of "de X" is the reverse. This can be used to classify possible plural nominals with respect to definiteness.

 Tests:

  * '''adjectival agreement:''' does the pronoun require singular adjectival modifiers to be definite or indefinite? Eg: "en/enhver/ingen gammel mand" / "den/denne gamle mand"

|| type || words || comps || adjs || examples ||
|| Pi[[BR]]A || to tre ... få/færre/færrest mange/flere/flest samtlige samme || Ni,(ud)+af+NPd || - || to mænd[[BR]] flere af alle byens indbyggere[[BR]] to mænd ud af hundrede ||
|| Pi || en/et hvilken/hvilket/hvilke hver/hvert nogen/noget/nogle anden (tagged PI)/andet/andre || NPi,(ud)+af+NPd || - || hvilke nogle bøger[[BR]] hvert et hus[[BR]] hver af alle disse bøger[[BR]] en to-tre rækker kartofler ||
|| Pi || sådan/sådant/sådanne || NPi || - || sådanne huse[[BR]] sådan et hus[[BR]] sådan nogle huse ||
|| Pd || hvad || for+NPi || - || hvad for bog/nogle bøger ||
|| Pd || enhver/ethvert ingen/intet den/det denne/dette : de disse || Ni,af+NPd || - || ethvert hus[[BR]] disse [få] mænd][[BR]] de af vore forældre der...[[BR]] ||
|| Pd || al/alt/alle begge || NP || - || al den peber[[BR]] alle dem[[BR]] alle disse dygtige cellister[[BR]] begge hendes børn[[BR]] alle cellisterne[[BR]] ||
|| Pd || meget/mere/mest lidt/mindre/mindst || NPm,af+NP || - || alt sand ||
|| Pd || hvem || af+NPd || - || hvem af alle disse drenge ||
|| Pd || jeg mig du dig : vi os I jer || Nci || - || jeg arme menneske[[BR]] vi to bagere ||
|| Pd || ham hende || Nsd || - || ham smeden ||
|| Pd || hvis min/mit din/dit hans hendes dens dets ens Deres vor/vort 's : mine dine hans hendes dens dets ens Deres vore/vores jeres deres 's || Ni || - || mit hus[[BR]] mine huse ||
|| Pd || man alting nogenting ingenting han hun dem De Dem ||  || - ||  ||
|| Pd || som der ||  || - ||  ||
|| Pd || sig hinanden ||  || - ||  ||
|| A || hele || Npi|NPsd || card noun || hele kager[[BR]] hele den store kage[[BR]] [[hele] to] kager ||
|| A || færreste fleste ||  || NPp ||
|| A || al hel/helt megen || Nmi || card || hel peber[[BR]] ?al den peber ||
|| adverb? || selv ||  || noun verb || fanden selv har sagt det ||
|| ModA || hvor || A+pos || - || hvor lidt|meget|godt ||
|| ModV || hvordan hvornår hvorfor hvorved hvorpå ||  || - ||
|| adv || hver ||  || ? || vi gav dem en bog hver ||
|| A:adj_ord || første anden (tagged AO) tredje øvrige næste sidste || ? || ? ||

The question here is whether the construction is headed by the determiner or the common noun, and whether the adjective is an adjunct of the determiner or the common noun -- a question that has been discussed at length in the literature. We will choose an analysis based on Richard Hudson's NP-analysis, with one slight difference due to the different formal frameworks employed: in constructions with a determiner and a noun, Hudson treats adjectives as dependents of both determiner and noun; since our formal framework does not allow double dependencies, and since there is definiteness-agreement between adjectives and determiners (and in German, strong-weak-mixed inflectional agreement), adjectives will be analyzed as dependents of the determiner.


====See also====


